# Gardin-EDA-2022
# Predicting Human-Wolf Conflict in Minnesota
# Taylor Gardin , Biosciences Department, MSUM 

# Abstract
# In Minnesota, the wolf population has been on the rise for the last few decades. More recently, the Minnesota Department of Natural Resources’ Division of Fish and Wildlife (DNR) has raised questions regarding the overall wolf population, management and behaviors. Additionally, further questions came to surface when cattle and human populations were included. The purpose was to analyze wolf behaviors when they are presented with potential conflicts. For this research, data was collected from the DNR, Minnesota State Demographic Center, and the Minnesota Department of Agriculture. By analyzing the data, we were able to reach predictions of potential predation by wolves. After comparing the densities of the populations by districts and counties, conclusions were able  to be reached. In the state maps provided, the counties with the lighter blue are areas where there is a higher risk of predation and conflict between the stated groups.

# Introduction
# Before the settlement of Europeans, wolves inhabited the whole state of Minnesota. Due to the bounty payments that began in 1849, wolves were already scarce in southern and western Minnesota by the start of 1900 (Fuller et al., 1992). In the 1960's the wolf population in Minnesota was only around 400 wolves. Within the past 40 years, thanks to wildlife biologists, the population has soared to an estimated 2,400 in 2020. Making sure populations are stable is a major way to help ecosystems thrive in the wild. However, what happens when humans are part of that ecosystem.Human-wildlife conflict is when encounters between humans and wildlife end in negative results, such as loss of property, livelihoods, or even life. With the rise in population of wolves in the past couple of decades, there has also been a rise in trapping and killing of the animals to keep people and livestock safe.(Mech D.) What if we could predict where conflict take place in Minnesota between humans and wolves? That is what is done in this exploratory data analysis. By looking at wolf population, human population, and cattle population we hope to find some pattern as to where we should see human wolf conflict in Minnesota.

# Methods
# The wolf population data was obtained from the Minnesota Wolf Population update 2020, documented by the Minnesota DNR. The cattle population data was obtained from a survey recorded by the USDA, and the human population data was taken from Minnesota’s Public Health’s website. Once the data was organized on excel spreadsheets the data was uploaded, combined, and reorganized using RStudio. Continuing the use of RStudio several graphs were created to display the data in order to find correlation. First, scatterplots were made showing wolf to human population, and wolf to cattle population. The second batch came in the form of maps showing density of our data. Using ubrmrp program, we calculated wolf population/miles squared, human population/miles squared, and cattle population/miles squared to get the densities per county for each data set. Once these were calculated we created maps showing the ratio of densities compared over each other.

# Results
# The wolf population vs the human population in each county is represented in Figure 1. This data showed no correlation between the two populations. Our line of best fit gave no true indication as to which way the data sways. When we created a scatterplot of the wolf population to cattle population it yielded the same results. The scatterplot showed no true correlation as the numbers were all over the board.

# Discussion
# The results of this exploratory data analysis are very interesting. Within figure 2 we would expect to see more human wolf conflict in the northern counties, or the lighter blue hues of the ratio scale because the density ratio of wolves to humans is higher than in the southern portion of Minnesota. The further south you go the human population increases, and the wolf population decreases. Also, the wolf's territory range only goes as far south as Chisago county. That is why the southernmost portion of the map displays zero display of ratio densities. With the wolf and cattle map, we see the light blue area where we expect to see conflict are only in Cook and Lake counties.Most of the livestock in Minnesota are in the southern part of the state, and since wolves are in the northern part this explains why there is only predicted conflict in the northeastern tip. It is the only area where the two populations meet. The significance of this exploratory data analysis is that these data sets have never been brought together before. Residents' attitudes on wolves are a little controversial depending on if you are a hunter, livestock owner, or just a resident (Schroeder et al, 2020). However, they do agree on a few things, wolves are a danger to pets, livestock, and the white-tailed deer population. According to the DNR in 2019 wolves killed 74 calves, 11 cows, 2 sheep, and 2 dogs. From 2014 to 2018 the Minnesota Department of Agriculture made annual depredation payment of $150,000 to livestock producers. Residents also agree that maintaining wolves' numbers and range in Minnesota is important (Schroeder, 2020). The residents of Minnesota enjoy having the wolf populations around and take pride in the fact that our state has made it a priority. They also care that the population is managed. The DNR has had a firm grip on management as the wolf numbers continue to rise. If the numbers get out of control our data could help find where it would be best to institute a hunting or trapping season for wolves in Minnesota. The data could also help relocate wolves that have attacked livestock. In almost every case when a wolf is relocated it never comes back to the offending area(Michael W. Fox). The research we have done here could assess the dangers of the wolf population getting too high and ensuring the safety of Minnesota's residents.

# Conclusion
# As we were comparing wolf population sizes per county over the years, we kept coming back to the fact of the population growth within the wolf territory.  While comparing the data sets and calculating the densities of cattle, wolf, and human populations within the state of Minnesota, we were able to locate the areas of higher risk of predation and conflict. Between wolves and cattle, the county with the highest risk is Saint Louis, which is located near the Northshore. Wolf and human conflict is highest in the northern counties of Minnesota– especially Lake of the Woods. 

# Acknowledgements
# I would like to express my special thanks to Emily Carpenter and Kam Knoll as we are a team who found the data and analyzed them together. 

# I would also like to thank Professor Merkord for the continued direction and guidance with coding and graphs for this research. 

# References
# 1. Erb J, Humpal C. 2020. Minnesota Wolf Population Update 2020. Minnesota Department of Natural resources. [accessed 2022 Mar 22]. https://files.dnr.state.mn.us/wildlife/wolves/2020/survey-wolf.pdf.
# 2. Fuller, T. K., Berg, W. E., Radde, G. L., Lenarz, M. S., & Joselyn, G. B. (1992). A History and Current Estimate of Wolf Distribution and Numbers in Minnesota. Wildlife Society Bulletin (1973-2006), 20(1), 42–55. http://www.jstor.org/stable/3782759
# 3. Fuller, Todd K.; Mech, L. David; and Cochrane, Jean Fitts, "Wolf Population Dynamics" (2003). USGS Northern Prairie Wildlife Research Center. 322.
# 4. Lofthus D, Tiffany Byrne. 2020. Agricultural Statistics Annual Bulletin. Peterson T, editor. Minnesota Department of Agriculture. [accessed 2022 Mar 16]. https://www.nass.usda.gov/Statistics_by_State/Minnesota/Publications/Annual_Statistical_Bulletin/2020-MN-Bulletin.pdf.
# 5. Martin, J. V., Epstein, K., Anderson, R. M., & Charnley, S. Coexistence Praxis: The Role of Resource Managers in Wolf-Livestock Interactions on Federal Lands (2021). Frontiers in Conservation Science, 2. https://doi.org/10.3389/fcosc.2021.707068 
# 6. Mech D. 2001. Managing Minnesota’s Recovered Wolves. Wiley. 29(1):70–77. [accessed 2022 Mar 20]. https://www.jstor.org/stable/pdf/3783982.pdf.
# 7. Minnesota State Demographic Center. 2019. Our Estimates. https://mn.gov/admin/demography/data-by-topic/population-data/our-estimates/ 
# 8. Schroeder, S. A., Landon, A. C., Cornicelli, L., McInenly, L., & Stark, D. (2020). Minnesotans’ attitudes toward wolves and wolf management. University of Minnesota, Minnesota Cooperative Fish and Wildlife Research Unit, Department of Fisheries, Wildlife, and Conservation Biology.
# 9. Wolves And Human Well-being: Ecological & Public Health Concerns | Dr. Michael W. Fox. drfoxonehealthcom. [accessed 2022 Apr 1]. https://drfoxonehealth.com/post/wolves-and-human-well-being-ecological-public-health-concerns/.
